---
layout: page
title: 
subtitle:  Our Aims and Objectives
use-site-title: true
---

The *Atlas* aims to facilitate more historically informed understandings
of digitised newspapers for researchers across disciplines. The
nineteenth-century newspaper was a messy object, filled with an
ever-changing mix of material in an innumerable number of amorphous
layouts; digitised newspapers are no different. Each database contains a
theoretically standardised collection of data, metadata, and images;
however, the precise nature and nuance of the data is often occluded by
the automatic processes that encoded it. Moreover, no true universal
standard has been implemented to facilitate cross-database analysis,
encouraging digital research to remain within existing institutional or
commercial silos. To overcome this, and to promote a remixing of
discrete repositories, researchers must solve several technical and
philosophical challenges.

At the start of the project, *Oceanic Exchanges* aimed to explore six
digitised newspapers datasets from the North Atlantic, covering the
nations of Mexico, the United States, the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, Germany, and Finland. These collections were chosen on two
primary criteria. First, they were collections with which the Principal
Investigators from each national team were intimately familiar, having
previously investigated internal reprinting patterns with them. Second,
the full machine-readable data and metadata sets was made available to
the team as either public domain data or under widely available
licencing agreements for text-mining. Once the project began, two
additional English-language collections—*Papers Past* from the National
Library of New Zealand and the (London) *Times Digital Archive* by
commercial publisher Gale—were made available to the team. Because these
datasets, alongside the *Trove* newspaper collection of the National
Library of Australia, were well known to team members and were quickly
accessible to researchers under clear licencing schema, they have been
included in the Atlas despite being beyond its initial North Atlantic
remit. Although we recognise that many other digitised newspaper
databases currently exist, and that large sections of the globe are not
represented in this guide—namely South America, Africa and Asia—we feel
that the *Atlas* nonetheless represents the first international,
multi-lingual collaboration of its kind, providing an exemplar of
physically reconnecting siloed datasets and working with collections as
data—their content, structure and metadata intimately bound together.
Moreover, by opening the digital *Atlas* to public collaboration, we hope
that additional collections will be chronicled and mapped in the future.

Each database instantiation that we have surveyed uses different
language to describe physical objects (for example a newspaper issue,
edition or volume), layout terminology (article or advertisement, title
or heading), and more abstract concepts (genre, document type).
Moreover, each database organises these terms into different hierarchies
of classification. Layers of nested items, containers, and technical
metadata unique to different standards (and often unique to specific
repositories) raise challenging questions about what data matters and
what data can be dismissed as too technical to be of interest to the
digital humanities researcher. Finally, although there is some truth to
the claim that “everyone uses METS/ALTO”, or something very similar,
when encoding digitised newspapers, this surface level consistency lulls
us into a false sense of security: we are rarely comparing apples to
apples—sometimes we are not even comparing fruit to fruit.

However, it is not the aim of this *Atlas* to provide a single “better”
standard for digitised newspaper data, a catalogue of what *should be*
across all collections. Instead, our aim is to provide a specific type
of map for this rough and often perilous terrain; to allow everyone,
regardless of their previous experience, to explore these collections in
relative safety. It is hoped that the electronic version of this *Atlas*
will continue to be updated the most recent surveys of these
collections, as well as with additional databases. To this end, we
hereby release the collection, open access, on GitHub, so that the
community of periodical researchers and digitisers may strive not to
homogenise our knowledge systems, but to make them mutually intelligible
and navigable, now and in the future.