---
layout: page
title: The Project
use-site-title: true
---
This *Atlas* is a product of *Oceanic Exchanges: Tracing Global
Information Networks in Historical Newspaper Repositories, 1840-1914.*
The project was funded through the Transatlantic Partnership for Social
Sciences and Humanities 2016 Digging into Data Challenge and was
undertaken by researchers from Universität Stuttgart, Staatsbibliothek
zu Berlin, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Universiteit
Utrecht, Turun Yliopisto, Loughborough University, University College
London, University of Edinburgh, Northeastern University, North Carolina
State University, and University of Nebraska-Lincoln.

The dramatic expansion of newspapers over the nineteenth century created
a global culture of abundant, rapidly circulating information. The
significance of the newspaper has largely been defined in metropolitan
and national terms in scholarship, while digitisation by local
institutions further situates newspapers in national contexts. *Oceanic
Exchanges* brings together leading efforts in computational periodicals
research from six countries—Finland, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom, and the United States—to examine patterns of
information flow across national and linguistic boundaries. Through
computational analysis, the project crosses the boundaries that separate
digitised newspaper corpora to illustrate the global connectedness of
nineteenth-century newspapers, uncovering how the international was
refracted through the local as news, advice, vignettes, popular science,
poetry, fiction, and more. By linking research across large-scale
digital newspaper collections, *Oceanic Exchanges* offers a model for
data custodians that host large-scale humanities data.

The *Oceanic Exchanges’s Atlas of Digitised Newspapers* arose out of the
need for the data from nine unique databases to be transformed into a
single unitary standard that could be inputted into project workflows
across the project. At the most basic level, what was needed was a
bespoke JSON format compatible with the text-matching software *Passim*
and discrete plain text files compatible with other tools used in the
project. Although basic bibliographical and content fields could be
quickly identified to allow for unique identification of texts, a deeper
understanding of the meaning of the metadata—and therefore its full
potential for digital research—was difficult to obtain. The different
vocabularies (such as Dublin Core, METS, ALTO, PREMIS, MIX) were used
inconsistently and combined differently in different instantiations. In
order to meaningfully connect these collections, the researchers needed
to bring these collections together—their data, metadata and
paradata—and then examine them as research objects in and of
themselves.

In 2017-18, led by Paul Fyfe of North Carolina State University,
*Oceanic Exchanges* gathered together thirteen instantiations of nine
distinct digitised newspaper databases, detailed below, alongside
histories of their creation, composition and licencing. In 2018-19, the
project team, led by M. H. Beals of Loughborough University, worked to
meticulously catalogue the data and metadata available across these
collections, to undertake detailed interviews with data providers and
libraries, and to develop a robust taxonomy for discussing the digitised
newspaper not only as a facsimile but as a research object in its own
right. This *Atlas* represents our conception of this
often-misunderstood research object, an ontology that describes the
relationships between a database’s internal components, between the data
and metadata in different collections and between the digital object and
its physical predecessors.