---
layout: map
title: British Library 19th Century Newspapers
subtitle: British Library, United Kingdom and Gale: A Cengage Company.
use-site-title: false
---

## History of the Collection

<img src="https://www2.le.ac.uk/projects/insularmss/images-logos/bl-logo/image" alt="British Library logo" width="100" height="200" align="right">[Parts I](https://www.gale.com/intl/c/british-library-newspapers-part-i) and [II](https://www.gale.com/intl/c/british-library-newspapers-part-ii) of the *British Library’s 19<sup>th</sup> Century
Newspapers* collection, now
part of the *British Library Newspapers* collection, were created as
part of a public-private partnership between the British Library and
Gale, a Cengage company. The British Library began developing a
prototype system for newspaper digitisation in 2001, focusing on
nineteenth century newspapers. The project aimed for efficiency in
digitising its newspapers through the development of automatic indexing
and sought to make the newspapers open to advanced searching. The
initial focus was on newspapers outside of copyright and eighteen
microfilm reels of varying quality were selected as part of this test.
Around 20,000 pages were processed in the first two months of the
project.

The British Library’s main efforts to digitise its newspaper
collections, beginning in 2004, were funded by a £2 million grant from
the United Kingdom’s Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC). The
project had an initial target of making 2 million pages available and
broadly useful to scholars, researchers, and the public. The British
Library partnered with commercial vendors to process the scanned images,
including Gale and Brightsolid; the latter partner continues to expand
the collection as the [British Newspaper Archive](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk), and the library itself is
currently undertaking a large-scale digitising effort entitled Heritage
Made Digital, neither of which are discussed here.

### Consulted Libraries

The British Library’s newspaper collection is based upon material
obtained through legal deposit legislation. By law, a copy of every UK
print publication must be given to the British Library by its publishers
and to five other major libraries that request it. Since 1869 newspapers
have been included within the legislation and between 1820 and 1869,
publishers were obliged to provide copies to the Stamp Office for the
purposes of taxation; the latter were passed on to the British Museum
and now form part of the British Library’s collection. The original
digitisation programme was exclusively derived from this collection.

### Microfilming Projects

From the early 1940s to 2010, the usual method of preserving newspapers
at the British Library was through the creation of access surrogates by
microfilming. Approximately 30% of the newspaper collection was
microfilmed during this time and, upon examination in the early 2000s,
it was deemed that only 2% of the historical microfilm collection was
unfit for digitisation by the Library’s Zeutschel microfilm cameras.
Microfilming continued at the British Library alongside the original
digitisation programme and was seen as an intermediary stage of the
digitisation process rather than a replaced technology. Microfilming has
been funded in different ways. Primarily it was funded by the BL, but
external microfilm providers have also been used, notably MicroFormat
(now a part of Stor-a-File), under contract to the BL. Microfilming of
newspapers from other libraries was undertaken as part of a number of
co-operative projects, most significantly Newsplan 2000, in which
at-risk newspapers titles from libraries across the UK we microfilmed
and distributed to the partner libraries, with master copies held by the
BL and the National Library of Wales. The project was funded by the
Heritage Lottery Fund with additional financial support from the
newspaper industry and ran from 2000 to 2005 (though Newsplan 2000 as a
body still exists). 1,325 newspaper titles, or 12,800,000 pages were
microfilmed, producing 30,476 reels of microfilm.

### Digitisation Projects

The British Library’s initial nineteenth-century newspaper digitisation
project took place in two phases. The first took place between 2004 and
2007 while the second ran from 2008 to 2009. The second phase was
specifically aimed at expanding the digital collections coverage of
regional and local news as well as including the eighteenth-century
issues of existing titles. Owing to budget constraints and available
technology, newspapers were not directly scanned to digital files in
either phase of digitisation. Instead, new microfilms were made of
newspapers, where needed, and these films were subsequently scanned. The
exception to this was *The Standard*, which was scanned directly from
paper copies at the Boston Spa repository. These in-house scanned images
and microfilm reels were sent to external vendors, first Apex CoVantage
(JISC I), followed by Content Conversion Specialists (JISC II), for
processing, providing the library and Gale with an archival master for
each page, as well as bitonal and greyscale images and processed OCR
text. Although this is a static collection, the BL has continued to
expand its newspaper digitisation: over 30 million pages have been
produced since 2010 through the BL’s relationship with Findmypast,
augmented recently by the BL-funded ‘Heritage Made Digital’ programme.

#### Selection

For the first newspaper digitisation project, the British Library opened
an online consultation with academics forming an advisory group of
library staff and scholars to develop a framework of titles that
provided a representative image of the country on a given date;
forty-eight titles were selected to provide a broad yet detailed view of
British life in the nineteenth century. Focus groups and user panel
meetings were not held for the second digitisation project because it
was decided that all titles could be of interest to some users. Although
the British Library’s physical collections of historical newspapers are
far more extensive, newspapers were selected for digitisation to provide
a representative sample of the wider collection, covering the
metropolitan and provincial press, ranging in political and geographical
coverage, and representing both English- and Welsh-language titles.

#### Preservation and Access

The British Library digitises newspapers as part of its remit to
preserve its collections. Its policy is to provide access through
surrogates rather than the originals, where possible. Traditionally this
has been done through microfilm, but the policy was updated in the early
2000s to create additional access copies through the digitisation of
existing or new microfilm reels. Therefore, for the original
nineteenth-century newspaper collections, digital copies do not act as
the sole preservation copy of the newspapers but rather an additional
form of access.

## Composition of the Collection

### Selection Available

The Gale 19<sup>th</sup> Century Newspapers collection contains
sixty-nine distinct publications. Of these, twenty-one were published in
London, thirty-three in England outside London, five in Scotland, five
in Wales, and two in Ireland. Many of the titles published in Scotland,
Wales, and Ireland are primarily held by their respective national
libraries, which have pursued separate digitisation projects. The
Library aimed to provide the full date range of each selected title to
the extent allowable by physical collection and within the project
criteria (1800–1900). Thus, titles such as the *Glasgow Herald*, which
began publication in 1783 and continues today, was only digitised from
1820–1900, or from the first issue held by the British Library until the
project cut-off date. Although the entire collection covers the period
from 1800 to 1900, the number of titles increases substantially as the
century progresses, with 10% of Part I being published before 1833, 10%
of Part I being published before 1840 and 50% of both collections
appearing after 1874.

### Data Quality

#### Text

Each page was processed into machine-readable text by Prime OCR. Part I
was processed by Apex, with the hand keying or OCR correction of article
titles. Part II was captured by Gale, who re-keyed articles titles for
both parts and later commissioned the keying of article subheadings from
an external contractor. Independent studies have suggested that the
overall OCR quality of Part I and Part II is approximately 60-85% but
varies widely within and between titles.

#### Image

For Part I of the collection, Apex provided an archival master file, in
TIFF format, at 300 PPI and 8-bit greyscale, as well as lower resolution
images for use on the web interface, including bitonal images of text
blocks and greyscale images of illustrations or photographs, to
facilitate use over dial-up modem technology. For Part II of the
collection, the resolution was raised to 400 PPI and the package of
images included an unedited archival TIFF, a slightly cropped, lossless
JP2 or JPEG2000 master image, and a compressed JPEG for use on the web
interface. Images of earlier and local newspapers were generally scanned
to produce a lighter image to improve OCR word accuracy.

### Metadata Schema

The data contained within the British Library Newspapers is available
under three distinct metadata schemes: two provided by Gale and one held
for project work by the British Library.

#### Gale Legacy Text Mining Drives

Before 2018, the Gale Text Mining Drive contained metadata and text
content in a single XML file. Although similar in coverage to the
METS/ALTO schema used by many public institutions, Gale established a
bespoke metadata schema to label information consistently across its
different newspapers and collections. A DTD file is provided on the
text-mining drives and the fields appear to be adapted from Dublin Core,
MARC and other standard bibliographical standards, to which they have
been successfully mapped when working with external content partners.

Each XML file contains bibliographic information for a single issue,
automatically zoned during the OCR process. The metadata for the issue
is followed by the machine-readable text, in which each individual word
is encoded with spatial coordinates of its location on the corresponding
image, as well as marker elements indicating new pages or columns. The
metadata was created partly through automatic processes and partly by
direct input by contract workers.

#### Gale Current Text Mining Drives

After 2016, the Gale Text Mining Drive separated metadata and text
content into three XML files: title or publication-level metadata,
issue-level metadata, and issue-level content data. As with the previous
schema, the data is encoded using Gale’s standardised metadata schema
and a DTD file is provided on the text-mining drives. Although distinct
from the METS/ALTO schema, this system is similar to a combination of
library MARC records and METS/ALTO XMLs.

#### British Library Project Drives

A pre-processed version of the data is held by British Library Labs and
has been used by BL Labs Competition winners and award recipients in
supported projects. This version of the XML is encoded at page rather
than issue or article level. As with the Gale version, each word is
encoded with the spatial coordinates. As it is encoded at page level, it
does not contain the marker elements for page or column breaks. This
provides a possibly more researcher-friendly variant of the XML, with
human-readable element names and an intuitive nesting of elements, but
lacks any form of delimitation between articles, which can be found in
the Gale version.

### Backend Structure

The definitive dataset is kept in a proprietary XML format, known as the
Gale Interchange Format or GIFT, and from this its text-mining and
online datasets are derived. In addition to the metadata provided on
text-mining drives or online, this database stores image metadata on
resolution, file format, bit depth, colour map, file size and image
dimensions. The image database stores image metadata, including image
resolution, file format, bit depth, colour map, file size, width and
height.

## User Interface Structure

### Web Interface

#### British Library Interface

Users of the collection through the British Library Interface can
perform basic or advanced searches of the collection or browse by
publication or location. The basic search can be filtered to a specific
metadata field or the full text, a date range, a specific title or a
specific digitised collection. The advanced search allows for standard
Boolean operators and fuzzy searching as well as filtering by place of
publication, issue section, title publication frequency, language and
whether an image is included. Results can be sorted by publication date,
article title, publication title or relevance and further filtered by
publication section or article type. Individual results can be viewed at
article, page, or issue level. At article level, the searched terms will
be highlighted; at page level the article will be outlined in red. The
image viewer allows users to navigate the issue and enlarge the image.
The selection can be printed, emailed, downloaded or bookmarked using
the interface at the top of the screen but there is no access to the
underlying OCR text. A suggested citation, including a word count, is
provided for each result.

#### Gale Primary Sources Interface

Users of the collection through the Gale Primary Sources interface can
search using the same features as the British Library interface, with
additional filters and simple analysis tools, such as topic finder and
term frequency. Once selected, users are presented with the chosen
article and options to navigate the issue or other search results. Users
can adjust the image contrast and brightness to improve legibility and
download it using standard browser context menus. The image may also be
downloaded as a PDF and can the plain text of the OCR content.
Bibliographical information, images and text content can also be saved
to cloud storage on Gale’s servers or through integrations with Google
Drive and OneDrive.

### API

API access is not currently available through the British Library or
Gale.

### Direct Download or Drives

#### Gale Legacy Text Mining Drives

The previous version of Gale’s Text Mining Drive for Part I had
separated data into directories containing either scanned images or
machine-readable texts. Images were contained in numerically labelled
batch directories (for example, BLC_Images_Archive_01) in which there
were individual directories labelled by the four-letter title
abbreviation used in the XML metadata. Within these were directories
labelled by individual issue dates in ISO format (for example, 18840102)
inside which were the page images. Machine-readable text files were
stored in a separate file structure, using numerically labelled batch
numbers (for example, BLC_XML_Archive_14). Within these are all the
XML files created as part of that processing batch.

The previous version of Gale’s Text Mining Drive for Part II packaged
image and text data together within a single data structure. Within
numerically labelled batch directories, data was separated into
directories using the four-letter abbreviation associated with a
particular title. Within these were individual directories for specific
dates, each of which contain one XML file, containing metadata and
content data, and the individual page images, stored as JPGs.

#### Gale Current Text Mining Drives

The current version of Gale’s Text Mining Drives separates data into
image and XML data. Within these directories, the data is separated into
processing batches, each with an individual alphanumeric code. Within
these are directories for each individual title that has been digitised
within that batch; a single title code might exist in multiple
processing batch directories. Within this directory are either the
metadata and content XML or image files for each issue. These are not
separated by specific date ranges but a full index of all issues, and
their location within the structure, are provided on a spreadsheet file
on the drive.

#### British Library Project Drives

XML data from the British Library Project Drives is divided into 524 ZIP
files. These are not indexed or separated by title or date and therefore
complete decompression is required to ensure a full title or date range
is extracted. Each file represents a single page and is named with the
project code, the title abbreviation, the year, the month, the day, and
the page of data.

## Rights and Usage

### Web Interface 

In the United Kingdom, the collections can be freely accessed within the
British Library reading rooms as well as remotely through Gale and
British Library interfaces provided to all UK Higher Education
Institutions (and some others) via JISC agreements. Outside the UK,
collections are accessible by institutional purchase, including many
public or national libraries; there is currently no individual purchase
model available.

### API

API access is not currently available through the British Library.
However, users can create batches of specific issues or titles for bulk
download through the Gale [Digital Scholar Lab](https://www.gale.com/intl/primary-sources/digital-scholar-lab), a
separate subscription service.

### Direct Download or Drives

Gale Cengage makes content from its collections available to academic
researchers for data mining and analysis through physical hard drives
for a nominal “cost recovery” charge. This includes directories, title
manifests, XMLs and image files. In the United Kingdom, as part of the
original agreement with JISC, the underlying data can be accessed by
request and a cost recovery fee by all higher education institutions.
Elsewhere, the data is only accessible to those with institutional
purchase to the relevant Gale products. Material obtained on text mining
drives may be used to examine individual text or for large-scale
analysis for purposes of performing personal or non-commercial research
purposes but cannot be duplicated or shared without expressed
permission.

#### Re-Publication

As part of the user agreement, XML, OCR and image data cannot be
re-published in any form, physical or digital, without the express
permission and licensing of the British Library (web interface) or Gale
(web interface and drives). Small quotations, using standard citation
practices, may be reproduced in accordance with local fair use
provisions and should be accompanied by a DOI link that points back to
the individual full text article or book chapter and a proprietary
notice in the following form: “Some rights reserved. This work permits
non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author and source are credited.”
