---
layout: page
title: Delpher
subtitle: Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Netherlands
use-site-title: false
---

## History of the Collection

<img src="https://www.library.universiteitleiden.nl/binaries/content/gallery/ul2ub/bibliotheken/hoofdafbeeldingen/delpher-logo.jpg/delpher-logo.jpg/d880x320" width="220" height="80" align="right">[Delpher](http://www.delpher.nl) is the free, online repository of
digitised printed material from the Netherlands. It was created and is
maintained by the Koninklijke Bibliotheek, the national library of the
Netherlands. It was officially launched in 2013, bringing together
several previous digitisation projects, and now includes more than 15
million newspaper pages, 7.3 million magazine pages and approximately
900,000 books from the fifteenth to the twenty-first century. The
digitised newspaper collection, originally funded by a subsidy of €12m
from the National Programme for Investments in Large-Scale Research
Facilities, has the explicit aim of being a resource for humanities
researchers. The library has worked with academics and journalists
throughout the process of selecting and obtaining the most
representative and relevant collection possible.

### Consulted Libraries

Delpher is the product of a collaboration between the university
libraries of Amsterdam, Groningen, Leiden, and Utrecht, the Meertens
Institute, and the Koninklijke Bibliotheek (The Hague). Newspapers are
included from the collections of various organisations from the
Netherlands and abroad, including: the Eemland archive; Arnhem Library;
Calvin College Archives, Michigan; Gelders Archive; the Municipal
Archive of Hulst; Municipal Sluis; Groningen Archives; Herzog August
Bibliothek, Wolfenbüttel; Historical Center Overijssel; Joint Archives
of Holland, Michigan; Royal Tropical Institute; Royal Institute for
Language, Land and Ethnology; Royal Library; Kungliga Biblioteket,
Stockholm; L’Archivio Segreto Vaticano; Museum Enschede; Meermanno
Museum; National Archives Suriname, Paramaribo; Niedersächsiches
Landesarchiv – Staatsarchiv, Oldenburg; NIOD Institute for War,
Holocaust and Genocide Studies; Northwestern College, Orange City; North
Holland Archives; Press Museum (now part of Sound and Vision); the
private collection of André de Rijck; Radboud University Nijmegen;
Regional Archive Alkmaar; Regional Archives Leiden; Roosevelt Institute
for American Studies; Russian State Archive of Ancient Acts, Moscow;
Rutgers University Library, New Brunswick; the Reformed Political Party
office; the Social Historic Center for Limburg; City Archives of
‘s-Hertogenbosch; City Archives of Rotterdam; City Archive of
Vlaardingen; Maastricht City Library; the National Archives Kew,
Richmond; Tresoar – Frisian Historical and Literary Center; Trinity
Christian College, Palos Heights; Ghent University Library; University
Library of Groningen; Leiden University Library; Tilburg University
Library; University Library Amsterdam; VU Amsterdam University Library;
Waterlands Archive; West Frisian Archive; Wisconsin Historical Society,
Madison; Zeeland Archives; ZB Planning Bureau and Library of Zeeland;
Central Library, Zurich.

For those newspapers still in copyright, the following rights holders
have contributed to the newspaper collection: AD News Media; Audax
Publishing; Erven A. J. Morpurgo; Erven D. G. A. Findlay; Erven J. A.
Pengel; Erven Varekamp; Erven Wormser; FD Mediagroep; Friesch Dagblad;
HDC Media; Media Group Limburg; NDC Mediagroep; *Nederlands Dagblad*;
NRC Media; Omroepvereniging VPRO; De Persgroep Netherland; Ried fan de
Fryske Bewegig; Reformed Political Party; Foundation for the Management
of the CPN Archives; *Nieuw Israelitisch Weekblad* Foudation;
*Utjouwerij Frysk en Frij* Foundation; *Trouw*; *Amigoe* publishing
house; *De Telegraaf* publishing house; Dhr. W. Lionarons; Vereniging
Algemene Omroepvereniging AVRO; Wegener Nieuwsmedia.

### Microfilming Projects

Since the 1970s, the Koninklijke Bibliotheek and other institutions have
engaged in microfilm preservation of their newspaper collections. These
efforts, however, were undertaken with differing specifications and not
all the collections have been found suitable for digitisation, usually
owing to the high contrast employed in some filming processes.
Therefore, while it was generally considered preferable to digitise from
microfilm collections, as doing so was more efficient and cost-effective
than scanning originals, the microfilm status of a title was not a
primary selection criterion for digitisation.

### Digitisation Projects

Digitisation of newspapers began at the Koninklijke Bibliotheek in 1999
as part of the Roaring Twenties and War & Revolution projects, in which
three national newspapers from the 1920s and 300,000 pages from the
1910s were digitised and underwent OCR. Building upon these pilots, as
well as a number of digitisation projects at other Dutch archives and
libraries, full-scale digitisation began in 2007 with the Database of
Digital Daily Newspapers or Databank Digitale Dagbladen (DDD) project.
In 2013, this database was combined with the library’s other digital
collections to be made available through the Delpher interface.
Digitisation of newspapers, alongside other heritage materials, now
continues as part of the general operations of the library and is
overseen by Metamorfoze, the Dutch national programme for the
preservation of paper heritage. All digitisation companies working for
Metamorfoze were selected by means of a European tender procedure and
all files are checked for completeness and correctness at the
Koninklijke Bibliotheek.

#### Selection

At the start of the DDD project, there was no complete catalogue of the
more than 5,000 national, colonial, regional and local newspapers that
had been published in the Netherlands since the seventeenth century.
Although the Koninklijke Bibliotheek owns the largest collection of
Dutch newspapers, several titles exist only in libraries and archives
elsewhere in the Netherlands or in other European nations. The selection
process of the DDD project started with the installation of an advisory
board, consisting of press-historians and journalists, charged with
selecting a number of major national newspapers as well as influential
and long-standing colonial, regional and local publications. As the
digitisation of these newspapers was primarily seen as serving academic
researchers, the advisory commission was comprised largely of Dutch
academics and journalists who were explicitly asked to consider the
scientific significance or press history relevance of the proposed
selection. Next to that as well as a geographical, as well as a
political and religious dispersion should be included in the selection.
The committee first defined what publications qualify as a newspaper: a
product of a printing press, thus having been made into multiple
identical copies, have been published at a set periodicity and day, have
had a high content relating to current affairs of all types and have
been available for purchase by the general public. Then chronological
periods were defined, based on important developments in the history of
the press: 1618–1800, 1800–1814, 1814–1869, 1869–1914, 1914–1965 and
1965–1995. For each period a set of criteria was developed, that was
used to select a set of important, trend-setting and representative
newspapers for each period. The aim of this was to have a representative
set of newspapers digitised from the beginning of the project. As more
and more newspapers were digitised during the following years this
initial selection is becoming less relevant by now.

### Preservation and Access

The Koninklijke Bibliotheek considers the digitisation of both microfilm
and original newspapers as part of its preservation strategy. It has
discontinued its microfilming programmes and is instead creating a
collection of high-resolution JPEG files as its archival objects of
record.

## Composition of the Collection

### Selection Available

As of December 2018, the database contains over 1.4 million newspaper
issues representing over 15 million newspaper pages. A full list of
included titles [is available](https://www.kb.nl/sites/default/files/docs/Beschikbare\_kranten\_alfabetisch.pdf). 
The collection includes
newspapers from 1618 to 1995, as allowed by copyright restrictions, and
efforts have been made to represent the entire chronology fully. There
is, however, a disproportionately large number of issues relating to the
Second World War owing to targeted digitisation of this period through
exceptional government funding.

### Data Quality

#### Text

Newspapers within Delpher have been scanned for OCR using ABBYY versions
7.0 to 10.0. According to a 2018 study by the library, the newspaper
collections, excluding those from the seventeenth century, have an
average word-error rate of 11.3% (standard deviation: 9.96). This
represents a material improvement over the databank’s earlier OCR
transcriptions, with newspapers from the Roaring Twenties and War &
Revolution projects having error rates of roughly 30%. The study
indicated that updating the current OCR by re-scanning archival masters
with ABBYY 11 will improve this to 9.01%. The library is currently
investigating this option. Owing to the Gothic font employed by
seventeenth-century newspapers, the OCR on these items is particularly
error-prone. To correct this, the library worked in a close
collaboration with the Meertens Institute and with a group of skilled
volunteers to manually re-key these transcriptions.

#### Images

For each page in the collection, Delpher maintains a JPEG2000 (lossless
8:1 compression) and PDF file, the latter of which is made available
through a structured URL based on an item’s unique identifier. Lower
resolution images (96 PPI) are available through the general web
interface and API.

### Metadata Schema

Newspaper data is divided into three file types: an MPEG21 XML file
describing the issue, an ALTO XML file for each page and an OCR XML file
for each article. This data adheres to two primary metadata schemas:
structural metadata using MPEG21-DIDL and descriptive metadata using
Dublin Core and derivatives thereof. The MPEG21 file describes the
structural hierarchy of the newspaper issue and provides descriptive
metadata for the issue. Its constituent pages and individual articles
include segment coordinates and stable URLs. Because a page may contain
multiple articles and an article may appear on multiple pages, these are
listed on the same hierarchical level with sub-elements describing their
relationships. The choice was made to segment issues at article level in
order to facilitate user searches, improve relevance rankings, and allow
for the removal of an article for copyright reasons without having to
remove an entire page or issue.

### Backend Structure 

Each issue within Delpher’s newspaper collection is comprised of several
items: the issue itself, each individual page and each unique article.
Each item is, in turn, comprised of multiple components, including
metadata, text, and image data, which are stored in individual or nested
resource files. The issue MPEG21 file contains the IDs for all other
items, components, and resources within that issue. Of these, only the
archival master images and complementary technical metadata are not
accessible through API or direct download.

## User Interface Structures

### Web Interface

The current user interface, Delpher, was built by an in-house team at
the Koninklijke Bibliotheek. It replaced an earlier interface designed
specifically to serve the DDD newspaper project. It is currently only
available in Dutch. The interface allows users to perform a simple or
advanced search of the underlying descriptive metadata and OCR text, or
to browse images by date and title. The advanced search allows for
filtering by article type, newspaper type, title, years, and place of
publication. The full-text search can be filtered using standard Boolean
operators. By default, search results are ranked by relevance but can
also be ordered by date, article title or newspaper title. Users can
also visualise their results as a date-segmented histogram. Once a
result is selected, a full-page image, centred on the relevant article
with highlighted search results, is displayed in an image viewer. The
viewer allows users to pan and zoom as well as navigate through the
issue. The underlying data (plain text, PDF and JPEG) and manually
selected snippets can be downloaded using icons at the top of the
viewer, and the metadata and OCR text can be viewed in retractable
widgets to either side of the image.

### API

Delpher supports a range of API queries. It can harvest complete sets of
metadata through the OAI-PMH protocol or sub-sets through a Java
implementation of the SRU search protocol. Search queries are made via a
structured URL at either issue or article level.

### Direct Download

The Delpher Open Newspaper Archive contains the texts (OCR, ALTO, XML)
of all newspapers from the period 1618 to 1876. The [archive](http://www.delpher.nl/data) is 111 GB in
size and divided into 22 ZIP files. For copyright reasons, the archive does not
include newspapers after 1876 but, under certain research conditions, a
licence may be granted for bulk use of post-1876 dates.

## Rights and Usage

### Web Interface

All material obtained from the Delpher web interface may be used freely
for personal research. When browsed or searched through the user
interface, users are presented with a full citation to the digitised
image and text. Any materials that remains under third-party copyright
are clearly labelled, including the specific conditions of use for that
item.

### API and Direct Download

Users are allowed to access archive (ZIP) files of all out-of-copyright
texts and metadata on Delpher for text and data mining. Advance
permission is required to access datasets that contain
copyright-protected materials. Although individual texts have been
released into the public domain, the dataset as a single object has been
released under a CC-BY license and must be properly attributed in
derivative works.

### Re-Publication

Out-of-copyright text and images have been released into the public
domain and may be used or republished for both personal and commercial
purposes. Items that remain under third-party copyright may not be
redistributed or republished, in print or digitally. They may, however,
be linked to directly.
  
## Suggested Citation

Beals, M. H. and Emily Bell, with contributions by Ryan Cordell, Paul Fyfe, Isabel Galina Russell, Tessa Hauswedell, Clemens Neudecker, Julianne Nyhan, Sebastian Padó, Miriam Peña Pimentel, Mila Oiva, Lara Rose, Hannu Salmi, Melissa Terras, and Lorella Viola. "Delpher." *The Atlas of Digitised Newspapers and Metadata: Reports from Oceanic Exchanges.* Loughborough: 2020. DOI: [10.6084/m9.figshare.11560059](https://figshare.com/articles/The_Atlas_of_Digitised_Newspapers_and_Metadata_Reports_from_Oceanic_Exchanges/11560059).

