---
layout: page
title: Suomen Kansalliskirjaston digitoidut sanomalehdet
subtitle: Suomen Kansalliskirjaston, Finland
use-site-title: false
---

## History of the Collection

The [*Suomen Kansalliskirjaston digitoidut sanomalehdet*](https://digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi/search?formats=NEWSPAPER)
has its origins in the Helsinki University Library Center for Microfilming and
Conservation, established in Mikkeli in 1990. Now known as the Centre
for Preservation and Digitisation, part of the Suomen Kansalliskirjasto
(National Library of Finland), the Centre joined three other libraries
in 1998 to form the Nordic digitisation project TIDEN. In 2001, the
National Library launched its initial digital newspaper collection with
36,000 of an intended 90,000 pages of forty-four different Finnish
titles published between 1771 and 1860. In 2005, the collection received
1.9 million page-requests and 160,000 unique visits. By 2018, the
collection included all newspapers and journals published in Finland
between 1771 and 1929 and is comprised of over 880,000 newspaper issues,
containing 6.2 million pages of content.

#### Consulted Libraries

The digitisation of Finnish newspapers was undertaken as part of the
Nordic Project TIDEN, comprised of the Royal Library of Sweden, the
National Library of Norway, the University Library of Aarhus (Denmark),
and the Helsinki University Library. The digitised collections are
generally based on microfilms held by the Suomen Kansalliskirjasto, with
some digitised from physical objects and new issues received
electronically.

#### Microfilming Projects

Newspapers had been the primary focus of reformatting programmes
throughout Scandinavia since the 1950s and microfilming has been used as
an access and storage format at the Suomen Kansalliskirjasto since 1951.
Through the late 1980s, newspapers were stored on 35mm cellulose acetate
film, first by a private service provider, Rekolid, and subsequently by
the Helsinki University Photographic Institute. Since 1997, all Finnish
newspapers have been microfilmed at the National Centre for Preservation
and Digitisation. Until the 1970s, microfilm reels were stored in the
same accommodation as print collections, after which they were
transported to the Viikki bomb shelter. Since 1990, they have been held
in air-conditioned vaults at Mikkeli.

As part of the Rescue Project, newspapers between 1771 and 1945 were
re-filmed (either copied onto a more stable medium or re-filmed from
originals), while newspapers between 1945 and the 1970s are currently
under consideration for re-filming, owing to the difference in filming
technology before and after 1980. All versions of the newspapers are
currently retained, and this has allowed the creation of composite
collections, wherein the original has been lost but a microfilm version
remains, for digitisation. The completeness of the microfilm collection
has allowed digitisation from microfilm, rather than originals, where
quality is sufficiently high. In cases where quality was insufficient,
originals were first microfilmed before being selected for digitisation.
Currently, a greater number of filming projects include supplements as
well as borrowed materials (in order to complete runs) than was
previously the case.

#### Digitisation Projects

The initial work undertaken by the University of Helsinki as part of
TIDEN was funded by the Nordic Council of Scientific Information
(NORDINFO) and the Ministry of Education in Finland. These initial
digitisation tests were important in defining best practice for future
microfilm digitisation projects, and its findings were published
alongside other recommendations by the International Federation of
Library Associations and Institutions in its 2002 supplement on
*Microfilming for Digitisation and Optical Character Recognition*. In
particular, the project developed test criteria for the digitisation of
microfilm and experimented with best practice in developing automated
production workflows. The project received €10,000 to €40,000 in funding
from the Nordic Council for Scientific Information, with additional
funding from the Ministry of Education allocation to the Finnish
National Library.

##### Selection

The digitized historical newspaper collection of the National Library of
Finland is based upon the newspapers acquired through free deposit laws
since the 18th century. At the time of TIDEN, the Finnish legislation
defined a newspaper as “a printed product published at least once a
week”. Historical newspapers had been microfilmed systematically from
the 1950s onwards and the aim was to digitise the whole older collection
step-by-step, using microfilm as an intermediary. The first Finnish
newspaper was published in 1771, and the first collection to be
digitized was from this year forward until about 1860. After the TIDEN
project, the next stages covered the newspapers from 1861 – 1890,
1891-1900 and 1901-1910 according to the allocated funding. Digitization
work followed the alphabetical order of newspapers within the chosen
timeframe.

### Composition of the Collection

#### Selection Available

The digitised collection contains all Finnish newspapers held by the
Suomen Kansalliskirjasto for the years 1771–1929, with later years
digitised and made available through special agreements with copyright
holders where possible; newer digitised newspapers are available at the
six national deposit libraries. As of October 2019, the full collection
included over 998 distinct newspaper titles, comprising 6,259,133
historical newspaper pages. The majority of these pages (4,031,018
pages, representing 64% of the collection) are currently available for
public use, with a further 2,228,115 pages, (post-1929), held in
restricted use. A full list of publicly accessible titles can be found
using the filter on the newspaper web interface.

Following the general trend, the volume of newspaper publishing in
Finland increased towards the turn of the century: when all issues from
1771 to 1910 are counted, 82.7% of the data is from 1890–1910, and 92.3%
is from the last four decades, 1870-1910. The majority of the newspapers
are in Finnish and Swedish, but there are some pages in Russian and
German, and other languages. Different languages dominated the Finnish
public sphere in different periods: more than 50% of the publications
before the late 1880s were in Swedish, after which the share of Finnish
language publications increased to over 75% by 1910. The Russian
language publications emerged after 1900, while there were already
German language publications during the 1820s and 1830s. Out of the
total number of newspaper pages in the collection, 1,063,648 are in
Finnish, 892,191 in Swedish, 8,997 in Russian, and 2,551 in German.

#### Data Quality

##### Text

The majority of nineteenth-century newspapers digitised by the Suomen
Kansalliskirjasto were printed using Gothic (Fraktur, blackletter)
typeface, with a minority of printed using Antiqua; the difficulty of
standard OCR software to recognise of the former typeface is well known.
By 2006, the Suomen Kansalliskirjasto had implemented automated encoding
of word coordinates and grayscale scanning, utilising the digitising
software DocWorks (CCS), with OCR by ABBYY Finereader, and structuring
metadata in-house by combining OCR data with catalogue information. The
next phase of development focused on automating OCR for both Fraktur and
Roman, on the same page and conforming to international METS encoding
standards. Analysis of parallel samples and word error rates showed that
about 69% of all word tokens can be recognised with the modern Finnish
morphological analyser, Omorfi. If orthographical variation is
considered and the number of out-of-vocabulary words is estimated, the
recognition rate increases to 74-75%. Overall the collection has a
relatively good quality rating of about 69-75%; around 25-30% of the
collections needs further processing in order to improve the overall
quality of the data.

##### Images

The publicly available images from the collection are available as a PDF
or JPEG file with a resolution of 300 PPI, the latter of which is made
available through a structured URL based on an item’s unique identifier.
High resolution images are stored at the server of the National Library
of Finland and released as part of [METS packages](https://digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi/opendata) in TIFF format.

#### Metadata Schema

The data hosted by the National Library of Finland uses the METS XML
schema for structural metadata, ALTO XML for the OCR content, MIX11 for
technical metadata, and MODS12 for descriptive and bibliographic
metadata.

#### Backend Structure

The main database contains metadata, page data, and file data containing
the archive directory information. The database offers page images of
the content and access to the content of the pages in ALTO XML format.
However, the URL structure is not easily translatable from bibliographic
data; it places the text files within numerical directories representing
individual bindings. For example:

`https://digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi/sanomalehti/binding/566631/page-4.xml`

In the data packages, pages are located in two separate directories: one
based on ISSN and the other on publication year. Below the publication
year in the data structure is the language of the publication, below
which are the actual ALTO XML files. They are named descriptively by
ISSN, year, date, issue and page. For example:

`0355-8347\_1881-07-01\_13\_012.xml`

### User Interface Structures 

#### Web Interface

The web interface allows users to perform a simple or advanced search of
the underlying descriptive metadata and OCR text. The advanced search
allows for filtering by material type, title, collection, years, place
of publication, author, keyword, publisher and language. The full-text
search can be filtered using standard Boolean operators, a fuzzy search
option, or by limiting to content or metadata fields. By default, search
results are ranked by relevance but can also be ordered by date, title,
author or date of inclusion in the collection. Once a result is
selected, a full-page image with highlighted search results is displayed
in an image viewer. The underlying data (plain text, PDF and JPEG) and
manually selected snippets can be downloaded using icons at the left of
the viewer, and the metadata and OCR text can be viewed in retractable
widgets.

#### API

There is currently no API system in place for accessing the newspaper
data, though bulk data from the collection can be obtained through web
crawling tools, using the aforementioned standardised file structure.

#### Direct Download or Drives

There are currently several options for obtaining the newspaper data in
bulk format. The Digital Collections maintain an [Open Data website](https://digi.kansalliskirjasto.fi/opendata) in Finnish and English
allowing the download of both METS and OCR data as date- or
language-delimited ZIP files. The years available vary and are not yet
comprehensive of the entire collection. The Newspaper and Periodical OCR
Corpus of the National Library of Finland (1771–1874) was released in 2011. The data package is in the METS/ALTO format and downloadable via
the [Language Bank of Finland](http://urn.fi/urn:nbn:fi:lb-2015051201).
The Newspaper and Periodical OCR Corpus of the National Library of
Finland (1875–1920) was released in November 2017. The data package is
downloadable via the Language Bank of Finland. The dataset includes all
those newspapers and journals that had been digitised by the end of the
year 2013. This includes all published newspapers 1875–1920.

### Rights and Usage

#### Web Interface

All out-of-copyright material obtained from the Suomen
Kansalliskirjaston digitoidut sanomalehdet web interface may be used
freely but it is requested that they be cited using standard citation
conventions. Any materials that remains under third-party copyright are
clearly labelled and provide the specific conditions of use for that
item; users may not redistribute in-copyright digitised material without
permission from the rights holder.

#### API and Direct Download

Users are allowed access to archive (ZIP) files of all out-of-copyright
texts, images and metadata. Although individual texts have been released
into the public domain, the dataset as a single object should be
properly attributed in derivative works. Users cannot deliver
in-copyright digitised material onwards without the permission of the
rights holder.
