---
layout: page
title: Papers Past
subtitle: The National Library of New Zealand
use-site-title: false
---

## History of the Collection 

[Papers Past](https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz) began in 2000 with a
project to provide access to nineteenth-century New Zealand newspapers
and periodicals. The initial aim was to make available 250,000 pages
within a year. The website was launched in 2001 with 300,000 digitised
pages, which were viewable and printable but not searchable, being page
images only. In 2005, the library ran a pilot project using OCR to
generate full text and to make the newspapers searchable. The website
was then relaunched in 2007 with a new interface to reflect this new
search functionality. In 2016, Papers Past was relaunched for a second
time, with the addition of three more sections—magazines and journals,
letters and diaries; and parliamentary papers–bringing together
full-text content from several standalone websites, such as the magazine
*Te Ao Hou*. This redevelopment also allowed for a mobile view.

### Consulted Libraries 

The Papers Past digital archive draws from the National Newspaper
Collection, which contains newspapers from New Zealand, Australia, and
the Pacific, part of the Alexander Turnbull Library collections in
Wellington. The National Newspaper Collection maintains these newspapers
in various formats, including paper, microfilm and digital media; their
microfilm collections have thus far been the primary source medium for
digitisation.

Several smaller projects have used other libraries’ collections in
conjunction with those of the Turnbull. The early Auckland newspapers
combined the holdings of the Auckland War Memorial Museum, the Auckland
City Libraries and the Hocken Library, University of Otago with those of
the Turnbull Library in order to get the most comprehensive coverage of
three titles from the 1840s: the *Auckland Chronicle and New Zealand
Colonist*, A*uckland Times*, *New Zealand Herald and Auckland Gazette*.
Likewise, the digitisation of *Niupepa: the Maori Newspapers* used
digital files from the University of Waikato, which had been originally
created from microfiche made from the Turnbull Library holdings. In some
cases, if the Turnbull Library does not hold the master or intermediate
microfilms, they will borrow another institution’s intermediate reels
and get a duplicate set made for digitisation, as was the case for the
Samoan newspapers, which were digitised from film held by the State
Library of New South Wales (Australia).

### Microfilming Projects 

The library has been microfilming newspapers since 1953. For the years
1953–1977, this was focused on regional and local papers, and the
filming was to save space rather than for preservation; physical copies
of the major metropolitan dailies were kept. Between 1977 and 1984,
efforts shifted to microfilming older newspapers rather than the current
titles. The programme was reviewed in 1984 and the revised goal was to
microfilm all New Zealand newspapers (current and historic). Initially,
this retrospective filming only covered issues up to 1940 but was this
extended to 1977 in 1992. In 1990, the microfilming of community
newspapers was stopped; filming continues today, with a focus on the
major contemporary newspapers.

Currently, microfilming is undertaken by an external vendor and the
master reels are maintained for the long-term preservation of the
collections and as an intermediary step prior to digitisation. However,
microfilming for a number of current newspapers is still carried out by
regional libraries, who also carry out some retrospective newspaper
microfilming and contribute hard-copy holdings to microfilming projects
organised by the National Library. The National Library also borrows
physical newspapers from other institutions for filming if it does not
hold a complete run.

### Digitisation Projects 

Newspaper digitisation at the National Library has three strands; the
National Library programme itself, the collaborative programme and a
partnership programme. Digitisation scanning was initially contracted to
one vendor for the initial scanning and a second vendor to undertake the
OCR conversion. Now, both scanning and conversion are done by a single
vendor.

The Collaborative Digitisation Programme adds additional newspapers to
Papers Past using the combined resources of community groups around New
Zealand. Every year, the library invites applications for new additions,
which are listed [online](https://natlib.govt.nz/librarians/national-library-services/collaborative-digitisation).
The programme started in 2010-2011 and is focused on small, local
newspapers. Local libraries and community groups can apply to have
microfilmed newspapers digitised or to have them microfilmed and then
digitised in a subsequent year. The library handles all the
microfilming, digitisation and uploading to Papers Past. There is also
the opportunity for larger institutions to partner with the Library,
normally over a three-year period. This follows a similar model to the
Collaborative Digitisation Programme but is over multiple years and is
generally used for the digitisation of the regional dailies. With both
programmes, the applicants contribute towards the direct costs of
digitisation, generally 50% of the cost.

#### Selection

As New Zealand has a relatively short print history, the first newspaper
being published in 1839, it was thought plausible to digitise an
extensive range of the nation’s historical newspaper collections for
public access alongside continued microfilming for preservation
purposes. In order to avoid copyright, the library initially only
digitised nineteenth-century New Zealand newspapers, though this date
range was later extended to titles published before 1920. Moreover, the
initial choice of titles was largely based upon the recency of the
microfilm processing, to ensure a high-quality transfer to digital
media; as the library is now focused on filling geographical and
temporal gaps in the digitised newspaper collection, the date of
microfilming has become less significant as a criterion for
digitisation.

Currently, the scope of the newspaper programme for Papers Past is
newspapers published in New Zealand or the Pacific up to the end of
1950, using the Library of Congress definition of a newspaper. In 2015,
as part of this expanded remit, the library added four titles from Samoa
and the library aims to add more Pacific titles in the future, with a
focus on the areas of the Pacific covered by the Library’s comprehensive
collecting policy: American and Western Samoa, the Cook Islands, Fiji,
Nauru, Niue, Pitcairn Island, Tokelau and Tonga.

The ongoing selection process tracks suggested titles and is focused on
expanding geographic and temporal coverage and addressing user demand,
considering also copyright status and the quality and availability of
microfilm. It is managed by the library’s Digitisation Team, with
selections approved by a small, in-house committee consisting of the
Digitisation team, the Service Manager of Papers Past, the Curator of
Newspapers and Serials, and the Microfilm Librarian. Previously,
digitisation has been prioritised for particular events; for example,
for the centenary of WWI led to the digitisation of materials from
1914–1918. Current priorities for selection are: geographical gap
filling; additional material in *te reo Māori*; extending existing
titles up to 1950; and additional Pacific material. A record of user
requests is kept, and those requests are used to help prioritise titles
for digitisation.

#### Preservation and Access 

A separate record for the digitised title is created in the library
catalogue, which contains a link to the title page on Papers Past. This
page includes an essay about the history of the publication, using
material from the library catalogue and Te Puna National Bibliographic
Database, as well as copyright information and acknowledgements. The
digitised copy acts as the primary access copy for the object with the
microfilm acting as the long-term preservation medium.

## Composition of the Collection

### Selection Available 

The National Library of New Zealand has now made available 5,789,376
newspaper pages from 847,719 separate issues. Of the 147 titles, 80 have
issues digitised before 1880, with 118 having digitised issues between
1880 and 1920 and 93 having issues published after 1920. The majority of
individual articles (roughly 80%) fall between 1880 and 1920; however,
depending on one’s definition of an article, the percentage of pre-1880s
content may be slightly larger than this number reflects; automatic
zoning of articles cannot always separate individual articles without
headlines, a common practice in the mid-nineteenth century, and may
therefore combine several items into a single digital object.

In 2015, the National Library added a collection of historical
newspapers published primarily for a Māori audience between 1842 and
1935. This is based on the digital Niupepa Collection developed and made
available in 2000 by the New Zealand Digital Library Project, at the
Department of Computer Science, University of Waikato. The source
material for this digital collection is “Niupepa 1842–1933”, a
collection of newspapers published in Māori or for a Māori readership,
microfilmed by the Alexander Turnbull Library (1988). That same year,
four titles from Samoa were also added, namely the *Samoa Times and
South Sea Advertiser* (1888–1896), the *Samoa Times and South Sea
Gazette* (1877–1881), the *Samoa Weekly Herald* (1892–1900) and
*Samoanische Zeitung* (1903–1930).

### Data Quality 

#### Text

There is currently no independent study of the OCR accuracy of the
collection.

#### Image

The *Papers Past* newspapers were digitised from microfilm as 400 PPI
bitonal images. Images were originally delivered to users as
archival-quality TIFF files, to eliminate the need to reformat or host
duplicate images. These were served through a proprietary viewer called
Daeja ViewONE. This changed with the 2007 relaunch and the move to
Greenstone (now Veridian). Images are now provided to users as embedded
GIF files, derived from the Modified Master files, but are still stored
as 400 PPI TIFF files for preservation reasons. Titles are also now
scanned as bitonal or greyscale, depending on the quality of the
original newspaper and the filming.

Users can request a copy of the 400 PPI Preservation Master via email,
and this will be supplied as long as there is no conflict with
third-party copyright. Users can also download a copy of a page as an
image file or as a PDF. The image files are large GIF files, while the
PDF pages are 200 PPI. GIFs appear, when downloaded, as having a
resolution of 96 PPI, but they are physically large files, which would
print at approximately 23x29 inches at 300 PPI.

### Metadata Schema 

The data contains several different metadata types: METS XML schema is
used for structural metadata, ALTO XML for the OCR content, and MIX for
technical metadata. The library supplies basic metadata to the vendor,
including title, date range, and bibliographic ID, with the rest
captured as part of the scanning and OCR process. The technical metadata
embedded in the image files, such as make and model of scanner and
software used, is harvested as part of the scanning process. Manual
headline correction and manual illustration caption correction is also
done as part of the digitisation process.

### Backend Structure 

The data for each issue is stored in multiple files within a directory
structure that provides date and title information, as follows:
TitleAcronym/YYYY/TitleAcronym_YYYYMMDD. Within this directory, there
are four sub-directories: one containing preservation TIFFs; one
containing modified master TIFFs, the METS file, and text data in the
form of ALTO-encoded files for each page of content, numbered using a
four-digit standard such as 0001.xml; one containing the IE METS file,
needed for integration into the National Digital Heritage Archive; and
one for page-level and issue-level PDFs.

## User Interface Structure 

### Web Interface

The newspaper web interface for Papers Past allows users to perform a
simple search of the underlying descriptive metadata and OCR text or to
browse images by date, region and title. Users can filter their searches
by date, title, region, or content type—as of December 2019 these
include *article, advertisement* or *illustration.* The full-text search
can be filtered using standard Boolean operators. Once a result is
selected, an image of the article with highlighted search results, is
displayed in an image viewer. The viewer allows users to view the
unhighlighted image or the OCR text. A breadcrumb navigation menu, such
as

Newspapers \> Auckland Star \> 9 November 1907 \> Page 13 \> This
article

allows users to navigate the issues or browse the title by date.
Bibliographic and copyright information is also provided.

### API 

With the DigitalNZ API, it is possible to access and use a sub-section
of the Papers Past metadata, including titles, dates, and URL. Currently
API data is limited to material digitised before 2013. An API key can be
obtained by registering through the DigitalNZ website.

### Direct Download or Drives 

The National Library of New Zealand is currently developing processes
for making out-of-copyright data available to users in bulk format.

## Rights and Usage 

### Web Interface

Newspaper material on the Papers Past website has been provided in good
faith for users by the National Library on the basis that the newspaper
publications provided from the nineteenth and early twentieth century
are out of copyright, that in most cases digitised copies replace
microfilm versions previously provided to the public and that for more
recent newspaper publications, permission has been sought from the
publisher to reproduce the material on this website. In many cases, the
publisher has made the material available under a Creative Commons
licence, most commonly CC-BY-NC-SA. Usage and copyright information for
a title is available under “Using this item” next to the article.

### API and Direct Download

Metadata available through the DigitalNZ API has been licensed for use
by its owners, and API access has some restrictions, such as not sharing
API keys and ensuring you identify the source. Papers Past data accessed
through the DigitalNZ API is for non-commercial use only.

### Re-Publication

When re-publishing material from this website that is out of copyright
or for which you have gained permission from the copyright holder, the
library requests that you acknowledge the National Library of New
Zealand as the source of the information. If the material is republished
online, they further request a link to where you found the information
on this website.
