---
layout: page
title: Trove
subtitle: The National Library of Australia
use-site-title: false
---

## History of the Collection

<img src="http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/d8/Trove_%28NLA_website%29_logo.svg/654px-Trove_%28NLA_website%29_logo.svg.png" width="220" height="60" align="right">[Trove](http://trove.nla.gov.au), originally known as the Single Business
Discovery Service, was launched in 2009 in order to create a single
point of entry for online discovery services developed by the National
Library of Australia since 1997, including the Register of Australian
Archives and Manuscripts, Picture Australia, Libraries Australia, Music
Australia, Australia Dancing, the Preserving and Accessing Networked
Documentary Resources of Australia (PANDORA) search service, the
Australian Research Repositories Online to the World (ARROW) discovery
service and the Australian Newspapers Beta service. The [digitised
newspaper collection](http://trove.nla.gov.au/newspapers), an extension
of the Australian Newspaper Plan (ANPlan) founded in 1992, aims to make
freely available as many Australian newspapers as possible and make sure
that they remain available in perpetuity, regardless of future
technological change.

The pilot by the Australian Newspaper Digitisation Program aimed to
digitise 50,000 pages from twelve (later eleven) titles, moving towards
three million pages over four years. These were curated from existing
microfilm copies by the State and Territory Libraries of Australia with
the aim of providing a sample of historical newspapers evenly
distributed across the country. Funding for the digitisation of the
newspaper collection has come from various sources. As of 2015, the
National and State Libraries Australia and other bespoke contributors
had directly funded the digitisation of about half of the newspaper
pages available on Trove; the infrastructure costs are borne by the
National Library without an additional appropriation from the government
and digitisation not funded by contributors is funded from the Library’s
collections budget. One million dollars was also provided by the Vincent
Fairfax Family Foundation to support the digitation of *The Sydney
Morning Herald,* the oldest continuously published newspaper in
Australia, between 1831 and 1954.

The Australian Newspapers Beta service was launched in July 2008 as a
standalone website and a year later became a fully integrated part of
Trove. Shortly after launch, the system incorporated a platform for
crowdsourced text-correction, allowing the public to improve the
searchable text, as well as the ability to apply social tags to
materials, create curated lists, and leave comments. These features have
allowed a high degree of community engagement and enriched the
collection. By 2009, users were able to access 720,000 pages of
digitised content. By mid-2014, the newspaper collection had grown to
13.5 million pages, claiming the title of the largest digitised
newspaper collection in the world and as of December 2019, Trove
contains over 23 million newspaper pages. Since 2018, the National
Library of Australia has invested heavily in expanding and improving
access to its collections through updated digitisation, API and web
interface protocols.

### Consulted Libraries

Most of the newspapers within Trove were scanned from microfilm
collections held by members of the National and State Libraries
Australasia: The National Library of Australia; the State Library of
Western Australia; State Library of New South Wales; State Library of
Victoria; Libraries ACT; Library and Archives NT; State Library of
Queensland; State Library of South Australia; and Libraries Tasmania.
Additional collections, held by private organisations, have also been
digitised through the digitisation partnership programme.

### Microfilming Projects

Established in 1992 as the National Plan for Australian Newspapers,
ANPlan brought together independent programmes of preservation by the
NSLA, alongside the National Library of New Zealand, which holds
observer status. It continued the devolution of the responsibility for
collecting, preserving and providing access to newspaper titles to
respective jurisdictions but initiated a coordinating role for the State
Library of South Australia. Part of this strategy was to ensure, as far
as possible, that at least one hardcopy instance of every newspaper was
retained alongside a surrogate copy, such as microfilm, to ensure
long-term public access. In 2001, the coordinating responsibility was
taken up by the National Library in Canberra. Although microfilming had
been the primary means of long-term preservation for fifty years, by the
mid-2000s, ANPlan partners had begun to express concerns about the
long-term viability of microform preservation, citing concerns about
film stock, microfilming services and the cost of suitable storage
facilities. These difficulties have been compounded by decreased
industry support, including manufacture and repair of microform readers
and duplicators as well as user preference for digital delivery.

### Digitisation Projects

#### Selection

It is the aim of the ANDP to make freely available all Australian
newspapers published prior to 1955. During the initial phase of the
programme, newspaper issues were selected under the National Library of
Australia’s Australian Newspaper Digitisation Program (ANDP) by the
National, State and Territory libraries. When digitisation began in
2007, the library deliberately chose one title from each state and
territory in order to be geographically representative. Afterwards,
particular attention was paid to the oldest or biggest newspapers from
each state but there was a general desire among the partners not to
focus exclusively on newspapers with the largest circulation but also to
represent smaller or more remote communities with less reliable physical
access to research libraries. Under this devolved model, State and
Territory libraries nominated the newspaper titles or issues for
digitisation and provided the microfilm from their collections while the
National Library also selected titles for digitisation, its focus
shifting year on year to address important themes, such as WWI, and
represent non-geographical communities. This selection process involved
the consultation of newspaper historians and a microfilm supplier. This
has led to some unevenness in periodisation across the collections, but
this will diminish as digitisation continues. In general, this devolved
decision-making process considered user demand, historical significance,
geographical and regional coverage and microfilm status. The initial
selection process, therefore, largely depended upon librarian expertise
of significance and user demand, as well as the availability of
microfilm copies of sufficient quality for digitisation. Currently,
selection occurs within the framework of the Library’s [Collection
Digitisation Policy](https://www.nla.gov.au/policy-and-planning/collection-digitisation-policy),
which considers a newspaper’s cultural and historical significance,
utility to a broad range of audiences, uniqueness or rarity, perceived
public demand, conservation status, rights conditions, planned
digitisation by other providers, and other practical and technical
considerations regarding its digitisation.

Since 2010, individual users and groups have been encouraged to suggest
titles or take part in a contributor-funded model, wherein they can
suggest a title and provide a subvention towards to costs of that
digitisation, so long as it falls within their general selection
guidelines. As of December 2019, the library maintains [online lists of
forthcoming titles](https://help.nla.gov.au/trove/for-digitisation-partners/newspapers-coming-soon)
and new additions (https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/rss/titles).

#### Preservation 

Although their 2010 five-year plan included discussion of ongoing
microfilming for preservation, the most recent strategy document for
ANPlan focuses almost exclusively on the digitisation of historical
newspapers for preservation and the retention of born-digital newspapers
files for legal deposit. A key aim of the 2015–2018 strategy was to
implement agreed minimum scanning standards for newspapers across all
member libraries and detailed guidance on digitisation from both
microfilm and hardcopy is available on the [Trove Digitisation Partners
webpage](https://help.nla.gov.au/trove/for-digitisation-partners).

#### Access

The Trove newspapers collection provides users access to the most
comprehensive selection of historical Australian newspapers in a single
location; it is available free-of-charge, worldwide. Existing microfilm
collections remain accessible at individual State and Territory
Libraries as well as the National Library of Australia and, at the
discretion of individual libraries and where conservation status allows,
users may still consult original hardcopies of historical newspapers
that have been digitised.

## Composition of the Collection

### Selection Available

As for December 2019, Trove Digitised Newspapers provides access to over
23 million pages across almost fifteen-hundred Australian newspapers,
including government gazettes, from each state and territory, from the
earliest published newspaper in 1803 to 1955, when copyright is assumed
to have expired. There are also fifty titles with digitised issues after
1955, nine after 2000, which have been made available with the agreement
of the publisher. This includes *the Canberra Times,* the *Australian
Women’s Weekly, Woroni* and the *Chaser.* In addition to the
English-language press, the collections also include nine international
Asian-Pacific titles and domestic publications written in Chinese,
Danish, Estonian, French, German, Italian and Swedish. A list of
newspaper titles already digitised is available on Trove, as well as a
[list of newspaper titles selected for digitisation for the current
year](http://www.nla.gov.au/content/new-titles-coming).

### Data Quality

#### Text

A single contractor was responsible for OCR and content analysis in the
initial phase, while a panel of OCR and content analysis providers were
later established to cater for the expanding programme. OCR contractors
process page-level image files provided by National Library of Australia
according to [publicly available guidelines](https://help.nla.gov.au/trove/for-digitisation-partners/digitisation-workflow-process-overview)
and provide hand-keyed metadata for key fields of each issue.
Afterwards, the Digitisation and Photography Branch engage in a quality
control process by which they check a sample of articles from each
batch.

The overall OCR quality of the Trove newspapers collection varies owing
first to variations in the source materials and second to the
non-systematic inclusion of end-user corrections. During the initial
processing, titles, sub-titles, authors and the first four lines of each
zoned article are re-keyed, resulting in 99% percent accuracy for these
components. Once online, Trove users are encouraged to help improve the
accuracy of the OCR text by allowing line-by-line correction and some
users have self-organised into volunteer groups to undertake systematic
corrections of certain parts of the collections. As of December 2019,
over 333 million column-lines of the OCR text had been manually updated
by Trove users, with one user having worked on almost 6 million lines.
However, this represents only a small percentage of the growing
collection and is not evenly distributed, with a disproportionate number
of changes being made to family notices and other material useful to
genealogical research. A history of these changes is recorded, allowing
staff to roll-back vandalism, and the web interface searches both the
original OCR and corrections to it. Articles that have or have not
undergone manual corrections can be filtered using the web-interface
facet “has:corrections”, while the API will return the number of
corrections and the last date the article was modified.

Thus, any given article within Trove may have had a small or significant
manual correction to the original OCR transcription, which itself varies
considerably depending the condition and typography of the original
item. As these corrections are updated hourly, the OCR quality of the
collection should be specifically tested for any sub-corpus used at the
time of analysis. Moreover, periodicals in Chinese, Estonian, French,
German, and Italian, currently have a greater variance in OCR quality
than the English-level titles, owing to software limitations. These
provisos acknowledged, independent research undertaken in 2013 showed a
general OCR accuracy of 80-90%, with the late 1840s rising to 94% and
the early 1920s dipping to just under 80%, and the library has
undertaken research into how to evaluate the improvement of crowdsourced
corrections in order to improve the reliability of their
machine-readable text as the number of digitised pages increases.

#### Images

During its digitisation programme, the majority of Trove newspapers were
scanned from 35mm master negative silver gelatin microfilm reels or
second-generation silver gelatin microfilm reels into a pair of digital
images, consisting of a 400 PPI raw greyscale TIFF and an Image
Optimised Bitonal TIFF. The National Library currently requires hard
copy newspapers to be digitised in colour with a bitonal image for each
page for OCR purposes. They are required to be formatted as a TIFF 6.0
at 400 PPI, compressed to LZW for the colour master image and CCITT
Group 4 for the bitonal image.

### Metadata Schema

As for 2018, the data contained within Trove utilises the METS XML
schema is used for structural metadata and ALTO XML for the OCR content.
The descriptive and bibliographic metadata is largely based on
human-inputted records, either by library staff or by human operators at
OCR processing facilities. Additional metadata regarding user
annotations and corrections is held in a separate metadata schema
accessible via the API.

### Backend Structure

As of 2018, the data for each issue is stored in multiple image and text
files, with two digital image files, including a raw greyscale TIFF
image and a bitonal TIFF image, for each newspaper page. File “pairs”
will have identical names apart from the character that distinguishes
bitonal and greyscale files (g for greyscale file, b for bitonal files;
c is used for hardcopy-derived colour images). One XML file contains
most of the human-supplied metadata for the issue, conforming to the
METS schema. There is then an XML file for each page containing the OCR
results using the ALTO schema. Each file has a name consisting of the
base, generally “nla.news-issn”, followed by the ISSN for the
publication (eight numeric characters, sometimes “x” as the final
character, with no hyphen), followed by a unique sequence number for
that page starting with “-s”, then by “-g” for the Greyscale image or
“-b” for the Bitonal image, and ending with an extension for the file
type. Sequence numbering is continued across scan jobs or microfilm
reels for each individual newspaper title so that all file names are
unique for a title. Image files are named sequentially based on the
order in which they appear in the microfilm.

## User Interface Structure

### Web Interface

The current user interface allows users to perform a simple or advanced
search of the underlying descriptive metadata and OCR text or to browse
images by date, place, category, tag and title. Facets, as well as the
advanced search, allow for filtering by article type, article length,
illustration inclusion, title, date, and place of publication. The
full-text search can be filtered using standard Boolean operators. By
default, search results are ranked by relevance but can also be ordered
by date. Once a result is selected, a full-page image, centred on the
relevant article with highlighted search results, is displayed in an
image viewer. The viewer allows users to pan and zoom as well as
navigate through the issue. The underlying data (plain text, PDF and
JPEG) as well as user-inputted categories and comments can be downloaded
using icons at the left of the viewer and the metadata, preferred
citation and OCR text can viewed in retractable widgets. When
downloading an image, the article is segmented and then embedded into an
HTML to facilitate printing onto A4 paper. A new web interface is
currently in development.

### API

The Trove API provides users with bulk access to the underlying data of
the Trove collections, including user-generated data, in a
machine-readable form. The API currently allows for the display of Trove
results on external websites, the harvesting of data for offline
analysis, the retrieval of user annotations and the creation of new
tools and visualisations. A personal API key can be obtained
automatically via a Trove user account; a commercial key is also
available but requires explicit permission from the National Library.
Materials can be accessed using a URL-based request or by using the
suggested but unofficial [API Console](http://troveconsole.herokuapp.com), which assists users in formatting
their requests. A [full technical description of the API is available](https://help.nla.gov.au/trove/building-with-trove/api-version-2-technical-guide).

### Direct Download or Drives

There are no current processes for making drives of data available.

## Rights and Usage

### Web Interface

The Trove web interface is freely accessible to all users, worldwide.
All material obtained from the web interface may be used freely for
personal research. When browsed or searched through the user interface,
users are presented with a full citation to the digitised image and
text.

### API

The API is free and open, with a key that is automatically obtainable
for personal use. Commercial use requires explicit approval by Trove.
Material derived from the Trove API may be used under the same
conditions as that derived from the web interface.

### Re-Publication

Digitised newspapers up to 1954, whether delivered through the web
interface or the API, are available to users as public domain images and
machine-readable texts. They may be reused personally or commercially
without other restrictions from the Library, but users should
independently verify the copyright status of materials, particular those
published in the twentieth century, before re-publication.
