---
layout: page
title: Language
subtitle:  
use-site-title: false
---

<h4 style="text-align:center;font-style:italic;margin-top:-20px;margin-bottom:50px;"><a href="../../maps/language">View Metadata Map</a></h4>

## Language Variants

Sprache; Taal; Kieli; Idioma.

## Usage Notes

The language in which newspapers were published was shaped by
various factors including the culture of reprinting, which meant that
articles published in Europe were often simply reproduced for a colonial
audience, and vice versa. This practice, along with class-based language
preferences and the efficiency of reusing text without translation,
tended to reinforce the centrality of particular dialects or languages
within multi-lingual states. For example, though the first newspaper to
be published in Wales appeared in 1804 (*The Cambrian*), the first Welsh
language weekly was not published until 1814 (*Seren Gomer*, founded by
Joseph Harris). Similarly, in Finland, all three of the oldest
newspapers still retain their original Swedish titles, while the oldest
daily newspaper in Finland is the Swedish language publication *Åbo
Underrättelser,* founded 1824. In colonial spaces, language homogeneity
was likewise encouraged by the dominance or early appearance of
government gazettes. As the provincial and colonial press expanded, so
did the use of dialect and different languages, including the printing
of non-European language newspapers within European colonies. Nor were
newspapers necessarily monolingual; Spanish, German and Italian
newspapers in Australia and the United States included English-language
articles and multilingual communities, such as New Orleans, support
bilingual publications. Editions of a newspaper in other languages are
often considered separate publications in databases because they will be
published on separate [**dates**.](../date)

English has become the *lingua franca* for XML, and all databases other
than HNDM use English to categorise all their metadata.

In regard to a sense of style and word choice, each newspaper
attempted to maintain a consistent tone throughout its pages. This is
exemplified by the uneven move from anonymity to signature in the
nineteenth century; established daily newspapers were some of the last
to adopt signed articles. Debates about the status of newspapers as
literature shaped the kind of language employed in the press, depending
on how each publication positioned itself.

## Examples:

“the **dialect speech** of middle-class speakers was more likely to
    be transcribed into ‘Queen’s English’, apart from the heckles of the
    working-class crowd. Vernon sees this as a sign of the closer
    association between Standard English and power, and the growing
    power of print over oral media.” \[Hobbs 2018, 309\]

“Omalla kielellä ei ole ollut valtiovallan poliittista tukea.”

“Place trumped class in the changing discourse of local newspapers,
    as a theoretically neutral technique—**dialect**—was used to include
    rather than exclude. This was part of complex changes in the
    relationship between spoken and written language, and the crossover
    between literary and journalistic techniques.” \[Hobbs 2018, 302\]

“Because of the timely nature of newspapers, very few newspapers are
    considered to be **translations**.” \[Sagendorf and
    Moore,
    40]\
