---
layout: page
title: Page Skew
subtitle:  
use-site-title: false
---

<h4 style="text-align:center;font-style:italic;margin-top:-20px;margin-bottom:50px;"><a href="../../maps/page-skew">View Metadata Map</a></h4>

## Usage Notes

The skewing may be due to the scanned newspapers being part of a bound
**volume**. As newspaper issues were intended to be printed and consumed
quickly rather than kept and revisited, publishing volumes offered
readers a more expensive, lasting edition of the articles. Sometimes,
the new volumes would include illustrations. Many digitisers rely on
bound volumes of many newspaper issues, as the volume format better
preserves them. For the British Library collections, in some cases
volumes that were tightly bound have had to be partially disbound and
then shrink-wrapped and returned to the shelves in a partially bound
condition for **microfilming**. The physical items are bound in volumes,
so there is not a one-to-one relationship between the physical object,
containing many issues, and the digital object. For Trove, some state
libraries have used formerly bound copies of newspapers, in order to get
the best quality for digitisation. The State Library of South Australia
disbinds its copies when **microfilming**, as does the Library of
Victoria, or they loosen the bindings during the microfilming process in
order to deal with margins and so on. Other digitisers indicate that
they do not usually disbind, as it is not usually possible to rebind
them, and this threatens the physical object. In those cases, the pages
can be harder to read as the binding interferes with the scanning
process.
