---
layout: page
title: The Metadata Maps
subtitle: 
use-site-title: true
---

This report contains a series of maps to better align and compare data
from different digitised newspaper collections. Each page is devoted to
a low-resolution category of the metadata, such as *title*, *publisher*
or *text*. Within that category, we have attempted to subdivide the
relevant elements and fields into categories of metadata that are the
most comparable across databases, for example *normalised title* or
*individual word*.

Each section provides a technical definition of that category as well as
an exploration of how the term, or variant terms, have been used by
modern researchers in periodical studies, literary studies, library
science and computer science (where appropriate) as well as in a
nineteenth-century context. This is followed by a discussion of any
exceptions or eccentricities regarding this category within the data
collections. It concludes with a list of relevant XPaths, or other
identifiers, and key information regarding the nature of the data in
each element. With this information, the reader should be able to
understand the different structures of these collections and develop
computational means for robustly comparing datasets.

These maps are accurate to October 2019 for the specific the collection
dataset listed above; however, it has been our experience that data
providers frequently update, tweak or otherwise modify their metadata
schema, both for new collections and in order to retrofit previous
collections based on end-user feedback. We are also aware of specific
forthcoming updates to several of these collections, details of which
have not yet been made publicly available. It is therefore advisable
that you consult with the data provider on their current schema before
undertaking any data mining project.